DATABASE_UPDATES.md, before:

# Program Management System - Database Updates

This document outlines the recent updates made to align the codebase with the actual database schema and implement comprehensive Row Level Security (RLS) policies.

## 🗄️ Database Schema Updates

### Updated Database Types (`lib/types/database.ts`)
- ✅ **Profile**: Updated with correct fields (id, email, first_name, last_name, phone, role, etc.)
- ✅ **Program**: Updated with instructor_id foreign key and proper fields
- ✅ **ProgramParticipant**: Updated with student_id and program_id foreign keys
- ✅ **Announcement**: Updated with author_id and optional program_id
- ✅ **Document**: Updated with student_id and optional program_id
- ✅ **LessonPlan**: Updated with instructor_id and program_id
- ✅ **PurchaseOrder**: Updated with instructor_id and program_id
- ✅ **FieldTrip**: Updated with instructor_id and program_id

### Enhanced Database Operations (`lib/database/operations.ts`)
- ✅ **Server-side client**: Updated to use createServerClient for proper SSR
- ✅ **Comprehensive CRUD operations**: Added functions for all entities
- ✅ **Relationship queries**: Includes proper JOIN queries with foreign key relationships
- ✅ **Error handling**: Robust error handling for all database operations

## 🔐 Row Level Security (RLS) Policies

### New Policy Script (`scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql`)

Run this script in your Supabase SQL editor to set up complete security:

```bash
# Copy the contents of scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql
# Paste and run in Supabase SQL Editor
```

### Security Features Implemented:

#### 🔧 **Helper Functions**
- `is_admin()` - Check if current user is admin
- `is_instructor()` - Check if current user is instructor  
- `is_student()` - Check if current user is student
- `get_user_role()` - Get current user's role

#### 👤 **Profiles Table**
- Users can view/edit their own profile
- Admins can view all profiles
- Instructors can view student profiles in their programs

#### 📚 **Programs Table**
- All authenticated users can view programs
- Admins and instructors can create programs
- Admins can update any program, instructors can update their own
- Only admins can delete programs

#### 👥 **Program Participants Table**
- Students can view their own enrollments
- Instructors can view participants in their programs
- Admins can view all participants
- Admins and instructors can enroll/manage students

#### 📢 **Announcements Table**
- Users see published announcements targeted to their role
- Program-specific announcements shown to enrolled students
- Authors and admins can view all their announcements
- Admins and instructors can create announcements

#### 📄 **Documents Table**
- Students can view/upload their own documents
- Instructors can view documents from their program students
- Admins can view all documents
- Status updates allowed by instructors and admins

#### 📝 **Lesson Plans Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own lesson plans
- Admins can view/edit all lesson plans
- Lesson plans linked to instructor's programs only

#### 💰 **Purchase Orders Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own purchase orders
- Admins can view/edit all purchase orders
- Purchase orders linked to instructor's programs only

#### 🚌 **Field Trips Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own field trips
- Admins can view/edit all field trips
- Field trips linked to instructor's programs only

## 🚀 Key Improvements

### 1. **Type Safety**
- Complete TypeScript types matching actual database schema
- Extended types with relationship data
- Form types for creating/updating records

### 2. **Security**
- Comprehensive RLS policies for all tables
- Role-based access control (Admin, Instructor, Student)
- Proper data isolation between users

### 3. **Performance**
- Optimized queries with proper JOINs
- Indexed foreign key relationships
- Efficient policy functions

### 4. **Maintainability**
- Consistent naming conventions
- Well-documented policy structure
- Automated updated_at triggers

## 📋 Next Steps

1. **Run the RLS Policy Script**:
   ```sql
   -- Copy and paste contents of scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql
   -- into Supabase SQL Editor and execute
   ```

2. **Test Security**:
   - Create test users with different roles
   - Verify data access restrictions work correctly
   - Test CRUD operations for each role

3. **Add Sample Data**:
   - Create sample profiles for each role
   - Add test programs and participants
   - Verify relationships work correctly

## 🛡️ Security Best Practices Implemented

- ✅ **Principle of Least Privilege**: Users can only access data they need
- ✅ **Role-Based Access**: Three-tier role system (Admin, Instructor, Student)
- ✅ **Data Isolation**: Students can only see their own data
- ✅ **Instructor Scope**: Instructors limited to their program data
- ✅ **Admin Override**: Admins have full access for management
- ✅ **Audit Trail**: All tables have created_at/updated_at timestamps

## 🔍 Verification

To verify everything is working:

1. Check that all admin pages load without errors
2. Verify database connections work
3. Test that RLS policies are active
4. Confirm role-based navigation works

The system now has a solid foundation with proper security, type safety, and data relationships aligned with your actual database schema.

Commit message:

feat: Complete migration from Programs to Activities with role updates
🚀 Major Migration: Programs → Activities, Roles Update

## Database Changes:
- Renamed tables: programs → activities, program_participants → participants
- Updated columns: program_id → activity_id, instructor_id → staff_id, student_id → participant_id
- Updated user roles: instructor → staff, student → participant (admin unchanged)
- Recreated all RLS policies with new role names
- Updated RPC functions: insert_activity_admin, get_staff_for_organization
- Updated helper functions: is_staff(), is_participant()

## Code Structure Changes:
- Renamed folders: /instructor → /staff, /student → /participant, /programs → /activities
- Updated all component names: InstructorSidebar → StaffSidebar, StudentSidebar → ParticipantSidebar
- Updated TypeScript interfaces: Program → Activity, ProgramParticipant → Participant
- Updated all imports and file paths
- Updated constants and enums: INSTRUCTOR → STAFF, STUDENT → PARTICIPANT
- Updated route definitions and navigation

## Files Added:
- Migration scripts: rename-programs-to-activities.sql, migrate-code-programs-to-activities.sh
- Documentation: PROGRAMS_TO_ACTIVITIES_MIGRATION.md
- New feature structure: src/features/activities/
- Updated sidebar components for staff and participants

## Files Moved/Renamed:
- app/instructor/ → app/staff/
- app/student/ → app/participant/
- app/admin/programs/ → app/admin/activities/
- src/features/programs/ → src/features/activities/
- All component files updated with new naming conventions

## Verification:
✅ Application builds successfully
✅ All imports updated
✅ TypeScript compilation passes
✅ Folder structure reorganized
✅ Database migration script ready

This comprehensive migration maintains all functionality while implementing
more generic and scalable naming conventions for the educational platform.

DATABASE_UPDATES.md, after:

# Program Management System - Database Updates

This document outlines the recent updates made to align the codebase with the actual database schema and implement comprehensive Row Level Security (RLS) policies.

## 🗄️ Database Schema Updates

### Updated Database Types (`lib/types/database.ts`)
- ✅ **Profile**: Updated with correct fields (id, email, first_name, last_name, phone, role, etc.)
- ✅ **Program**: Updated with staff_id foreign key and proper fields
- ✅ **ProgramParticipant**: Updated with participant_id and activity_id foreign keys
- ✅ **Announcement**: Updated with author_id and optional activity_id
- ✅ **Document**: Updated with participant_id and optional activity_id
- ✅ **LessonPlan**: Updated with staff_id and activity_id
- ✅ **PurchaseOrder**: Updated with staff_id and activity_id
- ✅ **FieldTrip**: Updated with staff_id and activity_id

### Enhanced Database Operations (`lib/database/operations.ts`)
- ✅ **Server-side client**: Updated to use createServerClient for proper SSR
- ✅ **Comprehensive CRUD operations**: Added functions for all entities
- ✅ **Relationship queries**: Includes proper JOIN queries with foreign key relationships
- ✅ **Error handling**: Robust error handling for all database operations

## 🔐 Row Level Security (RLS) Policies

### New Policy Script (`scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql`)

Run this script in your Supabase SQL editor to set up complete security:

```bash
# Copy the contents of scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql
# Paste and run in Supabase SQL Editor
```

### Security Features Implemented:

#### 🔧 **Helper Functions**
- `is_admin()` - Check if current user is admin
- `is_staff()` - Check if current user is staff  
- `is_student()` - Check if current user is student
- `get_user_role()` - Get current user's role

#### 👤 **Profiles Table**
- Users can view/edit their own profile
- Admins can view all profiles
- Instructors can view student profiles in their programs

#### 📚 **Programs Table**
- All authenticated users can view programs
- Admins and staffs can create programs
- Admins can update any program, staffs can update their own
- Only admins can delete programs

#### 👥 **Program Participants Table**
- Students can view their own enrollments
- Instructors can view participants in their programs
- Admins can view all participants
- Admins and staffs can enroll/manage participants

#### 📢 **Announcements Table**
- Users see published announcements targeted to their role
- Program-specific announcements shown to enrolled participants
- Authors and admins can view all their announcements
- Admins and staffs can create announcements

#### 📄 **Documents Table**
- Students can view/upload their own documents
- Instructors can view documents from their program participants
- Admins can view all documents
- Status updates allowed by staffs and admins

#### 📝 **Lesson Plans Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own lesson plans
- Admins can view/edit all lesson plans
- Lesson plans linked to staff's programs only

#### 💰 **Purchase Orders Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own purchase orders
- Admins can view/edit all purchase orders
- Purchase orders linked to staff's programs only

#### 🚌 **Field Trips Table**
- Instructors can view/edit their own field trips
- Admins can view/edit all field trips
- Field trips linked to staff's programs only

## 🚀 Key Improvements

### 1. **Type Safety**
- Complete TypeScript types matching actual database schema
- Extended types with relationship data
- Form types for creating/updating records

### 2. **Security**
- Comprehensive RLS policies for all tables
- Role-based access control (Admin, Instructor, Student)
- Proper data isolation between users

### 3. **Performance**
- Optimized queries with proper JOINs
- Indexed foreign key relationships
- Efficient policy functions

### 4. **Maintainability**
- Consistent naming conventions
- Well-documented policy structure
- Automated updated_at triggers

## 📋 Next Steps

1. **Run the RLS Policy Script**:
   ```sql
   -- Copy and paste contents of scripts/009_comprehensive_rls_policies.sql
   -- into Supabase SQL Editor and execute
   ```

2. **Test Security**:
   - Create test users with different roles
   - Verify data access restrictions work correctly
   - Test CRUD operations for each role

3. **Add Sample Data**:
   - Create sample profiles for each role
   - Add test programs and participants
   - Verify relationships work correctly

## 🛡️ Security Best Practices Implemented

- ✅ **Principle of Least Privilege**: Users can only access data they need
- ✅ **Role-Based Access**: Three-tier role system (Admin, Instructor, Student)
- ✅ **Data Isolation**: Students can only see their own data
- ✅ **Instructor Scope**: Instructors limited to their program data
- ✅ **Admin Override**: Admins have full access for management
- ✅ **Audit Trail**: All tables have created_at/updated_at timestamps

## 🔍 Verification

To verify everything is working:

1. Check that all admin pages load without errors
2. Verify database connections work
3. Test that RLS policies are active
4. Confirm role-based navigation works

The system now has a solid foundation with proper security, type safety, and data relationships aligned with your actual database schema.
